



WG Working Group                                             M. Hajdusek
Internet-Draft                                           Keio University
Intended status: Informational                          24 February 2026
Expires: 28 August 2026


   Timing Regimes in Quantum Networks and their Physical Underpinnigs
                   draft-hajdusek-qirg-timing-physics

Abstract

   TODO Abstract

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://example.com/LATEST.  Status information for this document may
   be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-hajdusek-qirg-
   timing/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the WG Working Group
   mailing list (mailto:WG@example.com), which is archived at
   https://example.com/WG.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/USER/REPO.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 August 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Prologue
   2.  Introduction
     2.1.  Goals
     2.2.  Non-Goals
   Author's Address

1.  Prologue

   In 1982, Digital Equipment Corporation, Intel, and Xerox published
   *The Ethernet: A Local Area Network Data Link Layer and Physical
   Layer Specifications*. This 120-page document specifies pretty much
   everything: diameter of the coaxial cable, its impedance, dispersion,
   maximum cable length, voltages and currents, signal rise times, etc.
   The types of physical connectors allowed.  How a bit is encoded in
   the signal.  How a frame is demarcated.  How collisions are detected.
   The format of messages.  Addressing.  Multicasting.  Polynomials for
   error correction.  It's ALL there.

   Equally importantly, it specifies *timing requirements*.  For
   example, the rise time for a signal on the coaxial cable shall be 25
   $\pm$ 5 nanoseconds.  The total worst-case round-trip delay is
   calculated in a table to be 46.38 microseconds.  How the entries in
   that table are combined to produce that number is fairly obvious;
   however, the numerical entries themselves are mostly unjustified in
   the specification itself, only stated.  One exception is the
   statement, "Rise and fall times meet 10,000 series ECL requirements,"
   referring to a specific series of well-known digital emitter-coupled
   logic parts, and hence incorporating a great deal of prior knowledge
   and work by reference.

   In the quantum world, we are starting from first principles.  Hence,
   we must begin at the beginning.  We want to have specifications like
   Ethernet's, but first we must describe how the entries in e.g. the
   physical propagation delay budget are determined.  The role of this
   document is to provide the underpinnings that give a shared
   understanding of how the basic numbers are determined and how they
   can be combined in a particular system design.

   Thanks, DIX Ethernet creators, for showing the way!

2.  Introduction

   Quantum networks that distribute end-to-end entanglement involve a
   number of tasks with varying demands on timing precision and jitter.
   The design of a quantum network will involve a layered protocol
   architecture where different layers take responsibility for meeting
   these differing constraints.  This document describes the various
   timing regimes, from most to least stringent, in order to assist the
   process of making key design decisions.

   The range of time scales of interest extends from ensuring the sub-
   wavelength stability of optical paths up to batch monitoring of the
   operation of the network itself.  Light with a wavelength of 1.5
   micrometers (common in communications, including quantum
   communications) has a frequency of approximately 200 THz (2E+14 Hz),
   for a cycle time of 5E-15 seconds.  Ranging from sub-wavelength
   stabilization through background operations such as routing,
   therefore, covers some 16 or more decimal orders of magnitude.  Add
   in a 24-hour thermal drift that must be compensated for in many
   cases, and we reach twenty decimal orders of magnitude from the
   bottom to the top.  Naturally, meeting this range of demands requires
   the use of a variety of mechanisms.  This document avoids specifying
   solutions to the problems, and instead presents the functions and how
   their requirements are calculated (or measured).  Thus, each
   individual network design should apply the methods introduced here
   and present a numerical summary of the resulting values, after which
   corresponding solutions can be proposed and implemented.

   Summary of timing regimes:

   *  *Interferometric stabilization:* photon wavepacket overlap,
      technology dependent, roughly nanoseconds.

   *  *Detector timing windoes:* opening and closing of detector timing
      windows, detector recovery time: nanoseconds to microseconds.

   *  *Measurement basis selection (if required in BSA):* performance
      will constrain entanglement attempt rate.

   *  *Optical switch control:* switching of trains of wave packets.

   *  *Pre-configured event-driven tasks:* timing-triggered or
      measurement-triggered execution of quantum circuits, microseconds

   *  *Urgent but not synchronization-critical tasks:* execution of
      classical code that processes RuleSet messages and selects or
      creates new quantum circuits for execution, milliseconds

   *  *Host-side application-level tasks:* post-measurement operations,
      milliseconds

   *  *Background tasks:* link tomography calculations, routing table
      updates, seconds to minutes

   Some of these can only be achieved using high-quality hardware, while
   others are software tasks.  Detailed analysis of these regimes will
   affect core software design in each network node type.

2.1.  Goals

   *  Identify and provide introduction to the physical principles
      related to timing regimes in quantum networks.

   *  Provide justification behind specific design choices discussed in
      our other documents.

2.2.  Non-Goals

   *  Detailed physical derivations.

   *  Exhaustive coverage of all existing quantum platforms and
      technologies.

Author's Address

   Michal Hajdusek
   Keio University
   Email: michal@sfc.wide.ad.jp
